# january '26
TODO | X min

---

### 1. the real harmonic minor

a few months ago I talked about harmonic minor in one of these. I made the claim that harmonic minor was exactly the same as natural minor except that the fifth was turned major. 

that's not true. although I do see now where the confusion came from. songs in minor are usually written entirely in natural minor, with the exception of the V being borrowed from the harmonic minor. 

here's what harmonic minor actually looks like:

### 2. russian llm gigachat

I was watching russian TV with my russian parents and an ad for a russian LLM came up. it's called gigachat. I had never heard of it before, but I think the name is hilarious. well, only if it was named that unintentionally. if it was intentional then I think it's a bit less funny.

I've never actually tried it and tbh I don't plan to but now I know it's out there.

### 3. portuguese guitar + fado 

I was looking for things to do in Portugal and fado came up. it's a traditional portuguese style of music featuring spanish guitar, portuguese guitar, and a singer. for some reason whenever it's brought up, people mention that "women cry" when they listen to it. which sounds a bit strange, but I had to admit I was curious. 

so I made some reservations at what seemed to be a nice fado spot in Lisbon. 8 pm reservations which, by my parents, standards is a very late dinner. by mine too, I guess. but it was worth it. the food was probably the best I had while I was with them and the music was great. I was sitting directly to the left of the portuguese guitarist. which was really fun because I could see exactly how he played the instrument. he used two finger picks, one on his index and one on his thumb.

unrelated but kind of related I also went to a flamenco show in Seville with my parents and it was amazing and inspired me to learn flamenco guitar

---

(1) *yo*